---
layout: bootcamp
title: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute: Mar 26-27, 2012
venue: Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute
dates: Mar 26-27, 2012
---
  * Tutorial 3
  * Tutorial 2
  * Tutorial 1

**Tutorial 3: HTML**

**A Simple HTML Page**

    <html>
      <head>
        <title>Greg's Pets</title>
      </head>
      <body>
        <!-- this is a comment -->
        <h1>A List of Greg's Pets</h1>
        <p>I grew up with a Manx cat. His name was Stumpy.</p>
        <p>He would chase <em>anything</em>.</p>
      </body>
    </html>

# A List of Greg's Pets

I grew up with a Manx cat. His name was Stumpy.

He would chase _anything_.

**Tables**

    <html>
      <body>
        <table border="1">
          <tr>
            <td>northwest</td>
            <td>northeast</td>
          </tr>
          <tr>
            <td>southwest</td>
            <td>southeast</td>
          </tr>
        </table>
      </body>
    </html>

northwest

northeast

southwest

southeast

**fish.csv**

    Date,Species,Count
    2012-05-01,marlin,3
    2012-05-01,shark,1
    2012-05-02,turtle,1
    2012-05-02,marlin,2

**fish.py**

    import sys

    print '<html>'
    print '<body>'
    print '<table border="1">'

    for line in sys.stdin:
        line = line.strip()
        all_fields = line.split(',')
        print '<tr>'
        for field in all_fields:
            print '<td>', field, '</td>'
        print '</tr>'

    print '</table>'
    print '</body>'
    print '</html>'

**makepage.py**

    import sys

    def process_line(line):
        print '<tr>'
        fields = line.strip().split(',')
        for f in fields:
            print '<td>'
            print f
            print '</td>'
        print '</tr>'

    def process_file(filename):
        print '<h1>'
        print filename
        print '</h1>'
        print '<table border="1">'
        reader = open(filename, 'r')
        for line in reader:
            process_line(line)
        reader.close()
        print '</table>'

    def main(filenames):
        print '<html>'
        print '<body>'
        for f in filenames:
            process_file(f)
        print '</body>'
        print '</html>'

    filenames = sys.argv[1:]
    main(filenames)

**Tutorial 2**

  * [ PCfB Regular Expressions Cheatsheet](http://practicalcomputing.org/files/RegexpExcerpt.pdf)
  * [ RegExp and Time notes](http://practicalcomputing.org/files/regexp_and_time.txt)

**Exercise 2**

  * [The exercise for week 2]({{root_path}}/files/2012/04/SWCexercise2.txt)

**Tutorial 1**

  * [ammonia.pdb](http://svn.software-carpentry.org/swc/data/pdb/ammonia.pdb)
  * [ethane.pdb](http://svn.software-carpentry.org/swc/data/pdb/ethane.pdb)
  * [ethanol.pdb](http://svn.software-carpentry.org/swc/data/pdb/ethanol.pdb)
  * [vinyl_chloride.pdb](http://svn.software-carpentry.org/swc/data/pdb/vinyl_chloride.pdb)

**General description:** [SWC Boot Camps](/bootcamps/)

This two-day course will cover a range of computing skills important to
scientists and data-processing. Specifically we will focus on the command-line
(a little bit), version control, python (a lot), databases, and developing
pipelines for streamlining data analysis. Follow-up training will be available
through book and online course material.

You will find more general information about the bootcamps at the link above.

Bring your own laptop, and if you need to borrow one, contact {haddock} [at]
mbari (dot) org.

`

**When:** 9am to 5pm, March 26-27, 2012.`

**Where:** [Monterey Bay Aquarium Research Institute](http://www.mbari.org/).

**Registration: **The course runs all day for two days, and the later content depends on earlier lessons, so please plan to attend both days.

**Unix commands covered**

**ls** - list contents of a directory
**cd** - move to a named directory
**cp** - copy file or folder

**history** - show command history

up-arrow - move back up through history

tab - autocomplete file name

> - redirect output to a file name

* - wildcard: match any symbol

**|** - pipe: send output to another command

******mv** - move (not copy)
**mkdir** - make a directory
**rm** - remove a file

**uniq** - select unique adjacent lines

**man** - get help on a command
**cut** - cut columns from a file -d to specify delimiter, -f to tell which column

**head** - show first -x lines of a file
**tail** - show last -x lines of a file

**less** - view a file page by page. space to advance, q to quit
**fgrep** - search for a pattern in a file

* * *

**loop.py**: averaging the numbers in a file

    # Count number of lines in data.txt.
    reader = open('small.txt', 'r')
    total = 0.0
    num_lines = 0
    for line in reader:
        line = line.strip()
        if len(line) > 0:
            num_lines = num_lines + 1
            first, second = line.split()
            total = total + float(second)
    print 'average is', total / num_lines
    reader.close()

**earl.py**: importing things

    from math import sqrt, log, atan
    from math import sin as something_else
    print 'square root of 10', sqrt(10)
    print 'and log is', log(10)
    print 'and something else is', something_else(10)

**kitty.py**: defining and using functions

    def double(x):
        print 'in double, x is', x
        return 2 * x

    def triple(x):
        print 'in triple, x is', x
        return 3 * x

    print triple(double(5))

**nicole.py**: putting a utility function in a file

    def count_lines(source):
        """Count the number of lines in a file.
           Takes an open handle and returns an integer
           Does not close the file/handle"""
        count = 0
        for line in source:
            count = count + 1
        return count

**humphrey.py**: a full-blown Unix utility

    import sys
    import nicole as n

    if len(sys.argv) > 1:
        for name in sys.argv[1:]:
            reader = open(name, 'r')
            count = n.count_lines(reader)
            reader.close()
            print name, count

    else:
        count = n.count_lines(sys.stdin)
        print 'stdin', count

**Homework**: write a Python program called `total.py` that adds up the values in a specified column of a data file.

  * Each line of the data file contains one or more numbers separated by commas.
  * There are no blank lines, commas, etc. in data files.
  * If the program is run as `python total.py 3 somefile.txt`, it adds up the numbers in column 3 (the first column is column 1, not column 0), and prints the total.
  * If the program is run as `python total.py 3`, it reads from standard input.
  * If the program is run as `python total.py 3 a.txt b.txt c.txt`, it prints the total of the third column for each file, and then the grand total (shown below).

    a.txt 27.2
    b.txt 91.5
    c.txt -3.0
    Total 115.7

* * *
